---
title: Welcome, friend of the earth!
type: page
---

![a beautiful forest](images/forest-931706_640.jpg)

We're happy that you have found your way to us. 

## What is this?

netpositive.money is an initiative by bitcoiners who want to contribute to
climate change solutions. Our goal is to make Bitcoin a net positive money. If
you want to read more about our approach, please visit our [about
page.](about)

## Is this still relevant?

That's a very good question. The state of the discussion on Bitcoin's climate
impact is rapidly evolving. When we started this initiative, there were few
people discussing this and no solutions beyond offsetting/donating to climate
organisations. Now people like [Troy Cross](https://twitter.com/thetrocro),
[Margot Paez](https://twitter.com/jyn_urso) and [Daniel
Batten](https://twitter.com/DSBatten) are rapidly changing the
narrative and pointing out real solutions. 

See [this short video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGXqkUcYLa8) for a mind-blowing
account of how Bitcoin mining could become a net positive for the climate in
less time than this initiative has existed for. And check out
[greenbitcoin.money](https://greenbitcoin.money/) for an introduction to an idea
by Troy and [Andrew Bailey](https://twitter.com/resistancemoney) how we can
green Bitcoin mining much more directly than through offsetting: mine your
values! 

### What does that mean for netpositive.money?

The [FAQ](faq) is still mostly relevant and correct, it's just that there are
now people like the ones mentioned above that have explained these topics even
better. We are now also more confident that Bitcoin will be a net positive money
eventually [and might even be
already](https://twitter.com/stefanwouldgo/status/1486271577398386690), if you
compare it to standard alternative ways of investing or spending the value it is
storing.

The [sources](sources) are mostly outdated now, but the issue has been
politicized to such an extent that it is nearly impossible to find unbiased
scholarship about this topic. We recommend following the above mentioned people
and our own [twitter account](https://twitter.com/netposmon) where we will
continue to point out interesting research and discussion.

The [calculator](calculator) has probably been our most popular feature (we
don't actually know because we don't track visitors) and we leave it as is for
now, while cautioning that we believe it's severely overestimating the real
climate impact. For one reason, we now know there is a substantial percentage of
Bitcoin mining that is carbon negative (See Daniel's video linked above for
details), and that is not in any way represented here.

So what about the [organizations](partners) we have recommended donating to?
They are still doing great work, and we still highly recommend giving to them.

However, there are now probably more direct methods of making Bitcoin net
positive. They all can be summed up by mining your values, that is, investing in
low carbon or even carbon negative mining that takes away some of Bitcoin's
mining revenue from fossil-based miners. It's not yet obvious how to best go
about this for everybody, but a market for these solutions seems to be emerging
and we will concentrate on tracking these developments in the future.
