---
title: Results
type: tocpage
---

![a beautiful forest](images/forest-931706_640.jpg)

## Our impact

**As of April 30th 2021, in just about 70 days, we have donated at total of
€7968,88 or $9649,76 (or about 0.183 BTC) for an estimated positive impact of
5200t CO2 emissions reduced. Taken together with earlier efforts by
Offsetbitcoin, Bitcoiners have given about 2 BTC for about 54 kt CO2 equivalent
emissions averted or reduced.**

Until now, by far the greatest impact has been driven by donations to
effektiv-spenden.de (€4587,88 for about the same amount of tons CO2). The German
community has really taken the lead here! 

Donations to MyClimate have also been strong, with 2507 CHF and €542  for at
total of 111t CO2 offset! Actually, relative to their number, the Swiss have
outdonated even the Germans!

**If you have donated to the Founder's Pledge Climate Change Fund via
effectivealtruism.org or to Tradewater before and have been using an ad blocker,
please send us an [email](info@netpositive.money) so we can count those donations manually! We're sorry
we've only found out now that this could go wrong.**

Thank you all for your efforts to make Bitcoin a net positive money! Please
continue to donate, spread the word, and inform us (on twitter
[@netposmon](https://twitter.com/netposmon) or via email
<info@netpositive.money>) if you learn about or are building other ways of
making Bitcoin a net positive money, so we can celebrate them here!


## Offsetbitcoin.org

Since we're only just starting out, for now
we are lucky to stand on the shoulders of giants:

[Offsetbitcoin.org ](http://offsetbitcoin.org/) is an earlier initiative similar
to netpositive.money. Today, the website only forwards to a donation page for
[Cool Earth](https://www.coolearth.org/) where you can donate in bitcoin.

They started back in 2018, however we only found out about them a few months
ago. Unfortunately, we haven't been able to contact them and they don't appear
very active today. We're happy to pick up the mantle, although of course we'd be
even happier about more active similar initiatives. Because this is not about
us, but about Bitcoin's carbon footprint. 

So it is with great pleasure that we report that Offsetbitcoin has collected at
least 1.82015599 BTC and offset at least 49 kt of CO2 so far (their numbers). As
you can see on the [calculator page](calculator), this might be a small first
step in a giant endeavour. Still, we celebrate this wonderful start and we hope
we can build on their success.

Note that so far, we've had almost exactly a tenth of the total collection sum
of Offsetbitcoin.org in BTC, but probably a similar amount in USD, since Bitcoin
has appreciated a lot since 2018. We are also more skeptical in our carbon
impact estimation (for classical offsetting, we get the numbers from the
organisations, for the effective solutions we assume 1€/t), so that also turns
out to be about one tenth of what they reported.


